Once around, Sagittarius, a star. A
fascinating tale of the discovery and
just how far we've come in uh a hundred
years in understanding the dark heart of
the middle of our
galaxy. So, Sagittarius, the
constellation, is in the southern part
of the sky. It's just visible from my
observing site here in Cambridge in the
summer months when it just clears the
hedge. And it's supposed to represent an
archer, but I'm afraid whenever I look
at it, all I can see is a teapot. Now,
just next to the teapot, marked by the
little red ring, that is the area we're
interested in. And the interest began
with this guy Carl Janssky and his
merrygoround pictured at the bottom of
the screen there, which is a radio
antenna on a turntable. And he was using
it to try to identify sources of
interference that were getting into his
equipment. and he was able to rotate the
antenna and work out the direction in
which any radio signals were coming. So,
it allowed him to do things like track
thunderstorms, but he found a strange
hiss coming into the antenna and
couldn't identify where this was from to
begin with.
What he noticed was after a year of
study that it seemed to be cycling on a
daily basis and he reasoned that that
suggested it was coming from the sun. Uh
the sun was known to be a source of
radio waves in other ways. So this
seemed entirely reasonable. Now in fact
it drifted from day to day and the
repeat period was not 24 hours. It was
23 hours and 56 minutes. So it could not
be the sun. It actually was fixed to the
apparent sky rotation of the distant
stars coming from the constellation of
Sagittarius and that is towards the
center of the Milky Way. So we have here
a radio inensity map of sources uh of
the whole sky here. When you see one of
these elliptical diagrams like this,
it's a map of the whole sky unwrapped as
if you had wrapped a sphere in uh
wrapping paper and then tried to unwrap
it. You'll find that the shape of an
ellipse like this is the one that you
need to cover a football for example.
So the uh intense spots of white there
are the really powerful radio sources
followed by red and then the dark blues
and blacks obviously are where it's a
fairly radio quiet environment. You can
see a few extra galactic radio sources
dotted about but the majority is coming
from the plane of the Milky Way with
those white spots distributed along
it. But if we look with some modern
instruments and we delve right into the
center of our galaxy, we can go right in
using uh different wavelengths looking
at X-rays and at infrared uh radiation.
It's very hard to use visible because of
all the dirt and dust that you can see
along the galactic plane blocking our
line of sight. But what we discovered
was that right in the center there was a
strong source of
X-rays associated with hot gas and quite
a large cluster of stars. And so if you
zoom in even more, you see a region of
hot gas with a dense core of central
stars clustering together there. And
again you can zoom in again with the
amazing Chandras X-ray telescope and
find a very intense region as a small
disc of um material is giving off very
hot X-rays. This is due to electrons
whirling around in a strong magnetic
field that gives this sort of X-ray
emission. And you can see the image
there showing that amazingly hot disc.
So deep inside, if we look at the star
cluster first, you can actually delve
into it and using infrared track the
orbits of the very central group of
stars which all appear to be orbiting
round in elliptical orbits at various
orientations around the point marked
with the red cross in this animation.
And there's no visible object at that
location in these
wavelengths.
So what we can do is look at the star
S2, which is the one that's on the nice
elliptical orbit in the center coming
down from the top now whips around the
object and goes back out again, giving
us that lovely ellipse. Takes 15.2 years
to do so. And the close approach is
estimated as 120 astronomical units. And
so we can use Kepler's third law of
planetary motion to figure out the mass
of the central controlling object. We've
done this a number of times in some of
my other talks, but this one works out
at 4 million times the mass of the sun
at that location where we don't really
see very much. Here's another animation
of a few other stars that are even
closer than S2.
S62 shown on the diagram there. That's
within 16 astronomical units. So less
than the orbit of Uranus and a couple of
the others are shown there, but one of
them
S4714 is the record holder. And it's
closer in than 12.6 AU, the orbit of
Saturn, 2 billion kilometers, just under
two billion. Now, that figure is
important because it's quite difficult
to work out what you would have if you
had 4 million solar masses crammed into
such a tiny area. And yet, we don't seem
to see very much um by way of an optical
component.
And in fact uh Carl
Schwartzchild who was a German scientist
he was actually in the trenches
calculating artillery trajectories
during the first world war. And for a
bit of light entertainment he solved
Einstein's newly published general
relativity equations to worked out that
there was a formula for the size of an
object and its mass connecting the two.
Basically, if your object was smaller
than the
radius calculated with his formula, then
for a given mass, the escape velocity
would be greater than the speed of
light. And this marks a boundary in
space known as the event horizon. It's
the radius around a black hole. Um,
where if you cross going in past that,
you can never come out again. nothing,
no matter, no light, no information is
able to cross from the inside to the
outside. It's a boundary in spacetime.
And there's a very simple formula that
he ended up with having solved the very
complicated equations, which is that
that radius is 2 * Newton's constant g
over c^ 2, the speed of light, times the
mass. So, it's just proportional to the
mass. And with that you can calculate
that 4 million solar masses would give a
radius of 12 million kilometers for the
event horizon. Now that's a lot less
than the 2 billion that we've seen a
star approach to and so uh there's no
danger that the black hole would have
actually eaten these stars. So at least
it makes sense that they're able to
orbit around it.
And so if we jump forward to the most
modern observations of the object in the
center there, this has come from the
EHT, the Event Horizon
Telescope, which isn't a telescope. It
isn't really one telescope. It's a
combination of radio telescopes linked
from all around the world creating one
vast array with the distance between the
extremes of the array being as far apart
as the diameter of the earth. Um so you
get the effect of the resolution of a
telescope the size of the planet. you
you don't get as much uh radiation, as
much light or as many radio waves as you
would get if the whole of the planet was
turned into a dish. But the resolution,
the finess with which you can discern
things is determined not by the whole
area of a dish, but by the distance
between its extreme edges. And so by
this technique of aperture synthesis
creating one linked array we get the
effect of very very sharp images. And of
course we can just expose for as long as
we like to get the total uh amount of
radiation to come into the telescope. So
we don't need to cover the whole area.
This was a technique pioneered in
Cambridge by Martin Riyle um in the uh
period after the Second World War uh
with a lot of spare radar equipment in
the birth days of uh radio
astronomy. And what that has enabled us
to do is pull together one image of
what's going on deep in the heart of
Sagittarius
AAR. The EHT created the image in 2017,
but there was about a five-year delay
before the image was released, and this
is what we got. You've got that uh
bright accretion ring around the central
dark patch where the black hole must be.
And you've even got a hint top left and
bottom right of some material jetting
away perhaps. Now, you've got to allow
for the fact that in creating these
images, the the light is coming away or
the radio waves are coming away from the
hot disc, passing the black hole and
being bent by the enormous gravity, the
uh warping of spaceime caused by the
mass in the center means that we can
actually see round behind it and see the
far side of the disc flipped up and
brightened, which is giving is that
bright spot at the top right
there. Now, that image was amazing
enough, but they've improved on it more
recently by looking at the polarization
of the light. And I just find this
incredible that for an object 27,000
light years away, perhaps 30,000 light
years away, depending on whose
measurements you take, um we are seeing
this amazing detail in the accretion
disc. And this is the twisting of the
magnetic field caused by the rotation in
the central black hole and spinning very
rapidly as material has fallen into it.
Of course, the angular momentum goes
into the black hole and is retained. And
so rather like a skater pulling their
arms in and going into a rapid spin,
these things end up spinning very
rapidly indeed. And that can cause those
jets to emerge as it twists and wraps
the magnetic field. Um, and if there's
any material falling into the black
hole, some of it tends to get jetted out
along those uh magnetic field lines at
the
poles. And talking of material falling
in, in 2002 a cloud of gas was
detected heading in towards the black
hole and within the accretion zone. It
might well have ended up being utterly
doomed and eaten. And the picture on the
right is the the S stars orbiting around
the central uh region and a simulation
of this cloud of gas that was detected
hurtling inwards. It's called G2 and it
was tracked and we've got a little
picture a series of overlays year on
year from 2006 through till
2014. And the picture shows the colors
there which are indicating the Doppler
shift uh due to the motion, the
rapid retreat and then whipping around
the far side and coming back out again.
Um and it did indeed survive. it was not
turned into the black hole's lunch. So,
it survived the encounter and the blue
shift of the final image is it whipping
around behind uh Sagittarius A star and
coming back out towards us. So, it it
wasn't feeding on this gas directly, but
ultimately I think this cloud of gas
will spiral inwards and eventually will
get eaten up by the uh black hole.
Now, our black hole was
uh right in the center there,
Sagittarius A star, is known to have
been feeding about 6 million years ago.
So, our ancient ancestors living in
trees perhaps would have been treated to
an amazing light show up in the sky um
in the region of Sagittarius. And we
know this because of the firmy bubbles.
These are two huge hot
regions of uh very tenuous but extremely
hot gas giving off X-rays marked in blue
and gamma rays marked in the purple
areas. So intense is the radiation and
the energy. These things are at millions
of degrees and are the results of an
outburst from Sagittarius A star
creating these enormous jets of material
whipped up by that spinning rotating
magnetic field hurling material out of
the galaxy above and below to the north
and south poles of the galaxy and
creating these enormous bubbles of uh
extremely energetic material out in
space. And so uh this is not a
photograph of course because we can't
stand outside our galaxy and look back
in but it is a map that has been
generated from observations.
So, I hope you've enjoyed that tour of
Sagittarius A star. And I just wanted to
leave with this comparison because the
Event Horizon Telescope first released
an image of a black hole, the one in the
middle of the galaxy known as Messier 87
in Virgo. And it produced a very similar
image with the hot accretion disc and
the dark region in the center. Uh so
that's the one on the left and
Sagittarius A star the image that was
released later is on the right and just
for giving you some sense of scale uh
the Sagittarius A star is much much
smaller. It it's about a thousand times
less massive than the black hole in the
center of
M87. And correspondingly everything is
scaled right down so that in fact the
accretion disc would fit right in this
to the uh Mercury's orbit uh around the
sun whereas the uh dark region of M87's
black hole. Well, you can see Pluto's
orbit marked there. So truly vast by
comparison. and the position of Voyager
1 would just about be on the uh entering
the accretion disc. Quite incredible.
So, I hope you've enjoyed that and I
will just leave it there. Thank you very
much for listening.